Add hardkernel-odroid-h4-plus docs (#903)
Dasharo/docs: docs/variants/hardkernel_odroid_h4/recovery.md

# Recovery

## Intro

The following documentation describes the process of recovering hardware from
the brick state using an [RTE](../../transparent-validation/rte/introduction.md)
and Dasharo open-source firmware.

## Dual BIOS

The **ODROID H4+ and ODROID-H4 Ultra** devices both have the Dual BIOS
feature. If the device does not boot properly, the backup flash chip can be
selected using the flash selector jumper.

![](../../images/odroid_flash_switch.jpg)
*First bios chip selected using the flash selector*

1. Move the flash selector jumper to select the backup flash chip. If the
   device does not boot from any of the flash chips, an external recovery
   needs to be performed. In that case continue with the recovery instructions

>    for the ODROID H4 model.

Reviewer: @philipandag please link that section I guess you mean "External flashing"

Reviewer 2: Probably this https://wiki.odroid.com/odroid-h4/hardware/restore_h4_bios#using_tool_and_soldering_skills and https://wiki.odroid.com/odroid-h3/hardware/restore_h3_bios_usbprogrammer#with_usb_programmer_module_ch341a.
Had to test this recovery and it worked (flashed only one SPI, second one recovered with `flashrom -p internal`)

Author: > please link that section I guess you mean "External flashing"
Yes, the sections were renamed and I didn't update this sentence.

https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/903/commits/aa4abb3b26367908a399f336b143dd20d13b4b27#diff-63d4fe5312d3d5c9d0e564e54adf0e43958113fb5d526eb698cd0ff31bd3dc79L19-L21

Do we want to give an URL to the instructions from wiki.odroid.com? If the point of this documentation is only to help the users maybe it would be better to only redirect them to the wiki instead of writing pretty much the same instructions again? I have added the URL to ODROID wiki instructions on flashing using the CH341A programmer as a second tab of the External Flashing section. https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/903/commits/a3a7f52f0fc29e94767ca3a2bacd77341bdc19bf

In that case maybe an URL to the dual-bios recovery method should also be referenced? The wiki tells how to do it on Windows and using the EFI shell, that might be useful to some users.

Author: The documentation on odroid wiki includes instructions on flashing from UEFI shell and Windows which weren't tested by us, so I can't tell if they would require any additional information. Some weird flashing software which you need to launch from a USB drive is used there. Flashing using flashrom is not described on the wiki, so it does not overlap with what we have in our documentation, it may be included as an additional source.

Author: Added a link to the documentation at ODROID Wiki.
3eae756f41b0

Reviewer 3: This is a link to ODROID H3, not H4. It may cause confusion and problems for users who will expect to see the same things as on the pictures under the link. Unless there is a link to H4 documentation with external programming, I would either remove it or write our own...

Author: That's the instruction they link under the H4 documentation saying it's the same for both H3 and H4. I think we could also note that it's valid for both models.

Reviewer 3: Please do so.

2. If the device boots, boot to an OS.
3. Move the flash selector jumper back to it's original position selecting the
   previous flash chip, from which the device does not boot.
4. With the device working, an OS booted and the flash chip selector moved
   back, the firmware can be flashed using the command:

    ```bash
    flashrom -p internal -w [path_to_binary]

>     ```

Reviewer: @philipandag, did you test that scenario, or are you just writing theoretically?

Reviewer 2: Tested it with original BIOS from https://dn.odroid.com/ODROID-H4/bios and it worked

```
bash-5.2# flashrom -p internal -w ADLN-H4_B1.5.bin
flashrom v1.2-1037-g5b4a5b40 on Linux 6.6.21-yocto-standard (x86_64)
flashrom is free software, get the source code at https://flashrom.org

Using clock_gettime for delay loops (clk_id: 1, resolution: 1ns).
No DMI table found.
Found chipset "Intel Alder Lake-N".
Enabling flash write... SPI Configuration is locked down.
FREG0: Flash Descriptor region (0x00000000-0x00000fff) is read-write.
FREG1: BIOS region (0x00600000-0x00ffffff) is read-write.
FREG2: Management Engine region (0x00001000-0x00413fff) is read-write.
Enabling hardware sequencing because some important opcode is locked.
OK.
Found Programmer flash chip "Opaque flash chip" (16384 kB, Programmer-specific) on internal.
Reading old flash chip contents... done.
Erasing and writing flash chip... Erase/write done.
Verifying flash... VERIFIED.
```

# Recovery

## Intro

The following documentation describes the process of recovering hardware from
the brick state using an [RTE](../../transparent-validation/rte/introduction.md)
and Dasharo open-source firmware.

> === "ODROID-H4+/H4-Ultra"
> 
>     ## Prerequisites
> 
>     The ODROID-H4+ and ODROID-H4-Ultra devices both have the Dual BIOS feature.
>     If the device does not boot properly, the backup  flash chip can be selected
>     using the flash selector jumper.
> 
>     ![](../../images/odroid_flash_switch.jpg)
>     *First bios chip selected using the flash selector*
> 
>     1. Move the flash selector jumper to select the backup flash chip.
>     If the device does not boot from any of the flash chips, an external
>     recovery needs to be performed. In that case continue with the recovery
>     instructions for the ODROID H4 model.
>     2. If the device boots, boot to an OS.
>     3. Move the flash selector jumper back to it's original position selecting
>     the previous flash chip, from which the device does not boot.
> 
>     ## Firmware flashing
> 
>     1. With the device working, an OS booted and the flash chip selector
>     moved back, the firmware can be flashed using the command:
> 
>         ```bash
>         flashrom -p internal -w [path_to_binary]
>         ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Dual BIOS

The **ODROID H4+ and ODROID-H4 Ultra** devices both have the Dual BIOS
feature. If the device does not boot properly, the backup flash chip can be
selected using the flash selector jumper.

![](../../images/odroid_flash_switch.jpg)
*First bios chip selected using the flash selector*

1. Move the flash selector jumper to select the backup flash chip. If the
   device does not boot from any of the flash chips, an external recovery
   needs to be performed. In that case continue with the recovery instructions
   for the ODROID H4 model.
2. If the device boots, boot to an OS.
3. Move the flash selector jumper back to it's original position selecting the
   previous flash chip, from which the device does not boot.
4. With the device working, an OS booted and the flash chip selector moved
   back, the firmware can be flashed using the command:

    ```bash
    flashrom -p internal -w [path_to_binary]
    ```
```

=== "ODROID H4"

> 
>     ## Prerequisites
> 
>     * [Prepared RTE](../../transparent-validation/rte/v1.1.0/quick-start-guide.md)
>     * 6x female-female wire cables
> 
>     ## Connections
> 
>     To prepare the stand for flashing follow the steps described in
>     the [Generic test stand setup](../../unified-test-documentation/generic-testing-stand-setup.md#detailed-description-of-the-process)
> 
>     ## Firmware flashing
> 
>     To flash firmware follow the steps described below:
> 
>     1. Login to RTE via `ssh` or `minicom`.
>     2. Turn on the platform by connecting the power supply.
>     3. Wait at least 5 seconds.
>     4. Turn off the platform by using the power button.
>     5. Wait at least 3 seconds.
>     6. Set the proper state of the SPI by using the following commands on RTE:
> 
>         ```bash
>         # set SPI Vcc to 3.3V
>         echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio405/value
>         # SPI Vcc on
>         echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio406/value
>         # SPI lines ON
>         echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio404/value
>         ```
> 
>     7. Wait at least 2 seconds.
>     8. Disconnect the power supply from the platform.
>     9. Wait at least 2 seconds.
>     10. Check if the flash chip is connected properly
> 
>         ```bash
>         flashrom -p linux_spi:dev=/dev/spidev1.0,spispeed=16000
>         ```
> 
>     11. Flash the platform by using the following command:
> 
>         ```bash
>         flashrom -p linux_spi:dev=/dev/spidev1.0,spispeed=16000 -w [path_to_binary]
>         ```
> 
>         > Flashing with flashrom takes about 1 minute.
> 
>     12. Change back the state of the SPI by using the following commands:
> 
>         ```bash
>         echo 0 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio404/value
>         echo 0 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio405/value
>         echo 0 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio406/value
>         ```
> 
>     13. Turn on the platform by connecting the power supply.
> 
>     The first boot of the platform after proceeding with the above procedure can
>     take much longer than normal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## External flashing

### Prerequisites

* [Prepared RTE](../../transparent-validation/rte/v1.1.0/quick-start-guide.md)
* 6x female-female wire cables

### Connections

To prepare the stand for flashing follow the steps described in
the [Generic test stand setup](../../unified-test-documentation/generic-testing-stand-setup.md#detailed-description-of-the-process)

### Firmware flashing

To flash firmware follow the steps described below:

1. Login to RTE via `ssh` or `minicom`.
2. Turn on the platform by connecting the power supply.
3. Wait at least 5 seconds.
4. Turn off the platform by using the power button.
5. Wait at least 3 seconds.
6. Set the proper state of the SPI by using the following commands on RTE:

    ```bash
    # set SPI Vcc to 3.3V
    echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio405/value
    # SPI Vcc on
    echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio406/value
    # SPI lines ON
    echo 1 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio404/value
    ```

7. Wait at least 2 seconds.
8. Disconnect the power supply from the platform.
9. Wait at least 2 seconds.
10. Check if the flash chip is connected properly

    ```bash
    flashrom -p linux_spi:dev=/dev/spidev1.0,spispeed=16000
    ```

11. Flash the platform by using the following command:

    ```bash
    flashrom -p linux_spi:dev=/dev/spidev1.0,spispeed=16000 -w [path_to_binary]
    ```

    > Flashing with flashrom takes about 1 minute.

12. Change back the state of the SPI by using the following commands:

    ```bash
    echo 0 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio404/value
    echo 0 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio405/value
    echo 0 > /sys/class/gpio/gpio406/value
    ```

13. Turn on the platform by connecting the power supply.

The first boot of the platform after proceeding with the above procedure can
take much longer than normal.
```

# Recovery

## Intro

The following documentation describes the process of recovering hardware from
the brick state using an [RTE](../../transparent-validation/rte/introduction.md)
and Dasharo open-source firmware.

> ## Dual BIOS

Reviewer: This section could be improved based on my experience from recovery after bad initial deployment: https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/903/files#r1788722185

Author: https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/903/commits/9fa8e3cb2e59fdb79531a08927d5452fe7742e55

Reviewer: I also had issues with flashing the whole firmware, especially on top of working proprietary BIOS.

Reviewer 3: @philipandag we need some confirmation on the status of this issue. I don't know what to do about this thread.

Author: I've included what Piotr asked for. I think it can be resolved.
